Add discussion of command organization (#1828)
wpilibsuite/frc-docs: source/docs/software/commandbased/organizing-command-based.rst

Inline Commands
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The easiest and most expressive way to do this is with a ``StartEndCommand``:

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    Command runIntake = new StartEndCommand(() -> intake.set(1), () -> intake.set(0), intake);

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

This is sufficient for commands that are only used once. However, for a command like this that might get used in many different autonomous routines and button bindings, inline commands everywhere means a lot of repetitive code:

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    // RobotContainer.java
    intakeButton.whileHeld(new StartEndCommand(() -> intake.set(1), () -> intake.set(0), intake));

    Command intakeAndShoot = new StartEndCommand(() -> intake.set(1), () -> intake.set(0), intake)
        .alongWith(new RunShooter(shooter));

    Command autonomousCommand = new ParallelCommandGroup(
        new StartEndCommand(() -> intake.set(1), () -> intake.set(0), intake).withTimeout(5),
        new WaitCommand(3),
        new StartEndCommand(() -> intake.set(1), () -> intake.set(0), intake).withTimeout(5)
    )

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

> (Creating one ``StartEndCommand`` instance and putting it in a variable won't work here, since once an instance of a command is added to a command group it is effectively "owned" by that command group and cannot be used in any other context.)

Reviewer: I'd have this as a regular paragraph or in an admonition instead of in parentheses.

Subclassing CommandBase
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> One possible solution to this problem is to create a new subclass of ``CommandBase`` that implements the necessary ``initialize`` and ``end`` routines.

Reviewer: I think it's not completely clear what the "problem" here is and how subclassing solves it.
Maybe something like "An alternative architecture is ...", and then establishing pros/cons or something.

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    public class RunIntakeCommand extends CommandBase {
        private Intake m_intake;

        public RunIntakeCommand(Intake intake) {
            this.m_intake = intake;
            addRequirements(intake);
        }

        @Override
        public void initialize() {
            m_intake.setPercent(1);
        }

        @Override
        public void end(boolean interrupted) {
            m_intake.setPercent(0);
        }

        @Override
        public boolean isFinished() {
            return false;
        }
    }

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

This, however, is just as cumbersome. The only two lines that really matter in this entire file are the two calls to ``intake.setPercent``, yet there are over 20 lines of boilerplate code! Not to mention, doing this for a lot of robot actions quickly clutters up a robot project with dozens of small files. Nevertheless, this might feel more "natural," particularly for programmers who don't feel confident with Java and want to stick closely to an object-oriented model.

Factory Methods
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> A useful middle ground between these two extremes is using a `factory method <https://www.tutorialspoint.com/design_pattern/factory_pattern.htm>`__. A factory method is a method that, each time it is called, returns a new object according to some specification.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about the link here; it seems to refer more to factory objects, which I'm not sure is fully relevant.

A command like the intake-running command is conceptually related to exactly one subsystem: the ``Intake``. As such, it makes sense to put a ``commandRun`` method as an instance method of the ``Intake`` class:

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    public class Intake {
        // [code for motor controllers, configuration, etc.]
        // ...

        public Command commandRun() {
            return new StartEndCommand(() -> this.set(1), () -> this.set(0), this);
        }
    }

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

Notice how since we are in the ``Intake`` class, we no longer refer to ``intake``; instead, we use the ``this`` keyword to refer to the current instance.

> .. warning:: To preserve encapsulation, avoid referring to ``private`` variables and methods of the ``Intake`` class from within the ``commandRun`` method, even though they are technically accessible. (For instance, the ``commandRun`` method should use the subsystem's public ``set`` method instead of interfacing directly with the motor controllers.)

Reviewer: I disagree with this. If already preserving encapsulation, I'd advise *not* having public `set` methods and exposing only command factories (and getters, when they are needed from outside the subsystem). See [6738's 2022 code for example](https://github.com/ExcaliburFRC/RapidReact2022/blob/main/src/main/java/io/excaliburfrc/robot/subsystems/Intake.java).
It also mostly solves the namespace collision issue.

Reviewer: I think it would be better in the instance factory method to use the motor object directly, and then add a comment somewhere that in some cases it might be better to extract logic to non-command methods (and then teams would make them public if needed).

Author: I strongly dislike giving any `Command` code direct knowledge of its subsystem's hardware setup (consider the scenario where a motor controller gets changed, or motors are added or removed).

I think I'm going to try to have another discussion of subsystem encapsulation here as well (it's looking like maybe this should be split into multiple documents), so maybe we have a link here to that discussion but for now we should just take a position and stick to it while we talk about other things (namely where commands live). Sort of the same deal as the enum thing.

Reviewer: Swapping motor controllers shouldn't change anything, that's what polymorphism exists for. Motors being added/removed would either need to modify commands anyway or it wouldn't at all.
And encapsulation isn't a problem here; nothing escapes outside.
What caused my stance on this is seeing three levels of indirection with an `arcadeDriveCommand` factory method that called an `arcadeDrive` method that called `DifferentialDrive.arcadeDrive()`: the middle level is more than redundant.

Using this new factory method in command groups and button bindings is highly expressive:

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    intakeButton.whileHeld(intake.commandRun());

    Command intakeAndShoot = intake.commandRun().alongWith(new RunShooter());

    Command autonomousCommand = new SequentialCommandGroup(
        intake.commandRun().withTimeout(5),
        new WaitCommand(3),
        intake.commandRun().withTimeout(5)
    );

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

> Adding a parameter to the ``commandRun`` method to provide the exact percentage to run the intake is easy and allows for even more flexibility.

Reviewer: Beware of too much flexibility. In most cases it's better to accept an enum or multiple factories for a number of preset options instead of giving absolute control to whoever is calling the command.

Author: In real-world code I'd be inclined to agree, but this is just as an example of how command factories can be parameterized. Defining an enum and explaining the logic behind it would distract from the main lesson IMO.

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    public Command commandRun(double percent) {
        return new StartEndCommand(() -> this.set(percent), () -> this.set(0), this);
    }

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

For instance, this code creates a command group that runs the intake forwards for two seconds, waits for two seconds, and then runs the intake backwards for five seconds.

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    Command intakeRunSequence = intake.commandRun(1).withTimeout(2)
        .andThen(new WaitCommand(2))
        .andThen(intake.commandRun(-1).withTimeout(5));

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

Command Groups
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Command groups have slightly different organizational concerns, but many of the same principles apply. Certain command groups are used in just one place, and so it's more sensible to define a command group entirely using inline decorators shortly before it is used (such as the ``intakeRunSequence`` command immediately above). However, command groups that are reused often, or large command groups such as autonomous routines, are still better when split into separate files. We'll consider command group using the same example from the previous section:

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this split. I think that the line between command and group is very blurry, and often times the "simple" factories in the subsystem are groups as well--that isn't necessarily clear from the way this is currently written.

I think the decision of whether the command should be in a separate file should be based on number of requirements rather than "how much it's used".

Author: Maybe this prose is unclear—by "separate file" I mean defined right when it's used, for example in `RobotContainer` as button bindings are being set up. I definitely agree that the line between commands and command groups is a bit awkward though.

I'm trying to preserve a sort of narrative, starting with very simple intake commands and moving on to command groups in separate static classes. If this were a spec sheet of information it's probably better to use the four different categories, but I'm not sure if that's best here.

Reviewer: Most of the articles (especially the command-based ones) are spreads of information, and the narrative/progression is only at the article level (ie articles about simpler topics are before articles about advanced topics).

Each of the structures has a use case that it is good for (and the example code should show that), so sorting the sections by the complexity of the example/use case is a good idea.
I'd say something like this:
1. instance factory methods -- simple intake commands
2. subclassing CommandBase  -- single commands that have somewhat custom logic (using the same example as 1 to show how it can get verbose is a good idea, well done!)
3. static factories -- "big" commands such as auto routines
4. subclassing command groups (with only a `super()` call; no overriding methods) -- "big" commands such as auto routines

Author: > Most of the articles (especially the command-based ones) are spreads of information, and the narrative/progression is only at the article level (ie articles about simpler topics are before articles about advanced topics).

Yes, but I'm explicitly not following that model here—I plan to write a more spec-sheet-y companion piece that's just "here's a good structure for intermediate robot code" (that might need some design discussion). Maybe I should put a bigger notice up at the top, but this is designed for programmers who want to do some legitimate thinking about what works best for them.

I'm not sure I agree with your categorization of which command group is best for which use case (which sort of indicates how this works better as a design _discussion_ rather than a prescriptive guide). 

For example, for single commands that have somewhat complicated logic, I personally would usually avoid subclassing `CommandBase` and instead use a `FunctionalCommand` in a static or non-static factory method. (I'd also try to just generally avoid complicated logic in commands, and try to achieve the functionality via command composition instead.) But again, this is a matter of personal taste—figuring out command composition is often more difficult for inexperienced teams then building a somewhat chunky command subclass with its own little state machine inside. 

I may take another crack at revising things, though, so watch this space.

Reviewer: > I personally would usually avoid subclassing CommandBase and instead use a FunctionalCommand in a static or non-static factory method. 

Since you're implementing all four command lifecycle methods anyway, there's little difference in verbosity; writing a class allows you to more easily share state between the lifecycle methods. Having said all that, I do agree that it's a matter of personal preference.
As for the rest of that paragraph, I 100% agree.

---

> Yes, but I'm explicitly not following that model here—I plan to write a more spec-sheet-y companion piece that's just "here's a good structure for intermediate robot code" (that might need some design discussion). Maybe I should put a bigger notice up at the top, but this is designed for programmers who want to do some legitimate thinking about what works best for them.

I'm not sure what we're disagreeing here about. What I was thinking of for this doc is an explanation of each option with pros and cons, and leave it as an exercise to the reader to figure out what's appropriate and works best for their use case. I was not intending for this to be a "The *One* True Way".
However, concrete examples massively help to understand these abstract topics, and examples need to be based on experience--which is why it's open for discussion. I gave those examples because that's what matches my experience, I'm open to others' experience.

    // TODO

Subclassing
~~~~~~~~~~~

When splitting a command group into a separate file, subclassing the desired type is a natural solution. In this design, the command group is configured in the constructor.

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    public class IntakeThenOuttake extends SequentialCommandGroup {
        public IntakeThenOuttake(Intake intake) {
            super(
                intake.commandRun(1).withTimeout(2),
                new WaitCommand(2),
                intake.commandRun(-1).withTimeout(5)
            );
        }
    }
  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

This is relatively short and minimizes boilerplate. It is also comfortable to use in a purely object-oriented paradigm and may be more acceptable to novice programmers. However, it has some downsides. For one, it is not immediately clear exactly what type of command group this is from the constructor definition: it is better to define this in a more inline and expressive way, particularly when nested command groups start showing up. Additionally, it requires a new file for every single command group, even when the groups are conceptually related.

Static Factory Methods
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Instead, it's better to split command groups into *static* factory methods, and provide their subsystem dependencies via dependency injection.

Reviewer: see above re "An alternative architecture".

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    intakeButton.whileHeld(intake.commandRun());

    Command intakeAndShoot = intake.commandRun().alongWith(new RunShooter());

    Command autonomousCommand = new SequentialCommandGroup(
        intake.commandRun().withTimeout(5),
        new WaitCommand(3),
        intake.commandRun().withTimeout(5)
    );

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

Adding a parameter to the ``commandRun`` method to provide the exact percentage to run the intake is easy and allows for even more flexibility.

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    public Command commandRun(double percent) {
        return new StartEndCommand(() -> this.set(percent), () -> this.set(0), this);
    }

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

For instance, this code creates a command group that runs the intake forwards for two seconds, waits for two seconds, and then runs the intake backwards for five seconds.

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    Command intakeRunSequence = intake.commandRun(1).withTimeout(2)
        .andThen(new WaitCommand(2))
        .andThen(intake.commandRun(-1).withTimeout(5));

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

Static Command Factories
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The factory methods presented above do have some negatives. They clutter up the `Intake` class (and the namespace of `Intake` methods) with command-related methods. With that pattern, it's also possible to break the intended encapsulation of the subsystem (as the warning box alludes to), since code in these factory methods can access `private` members of the `Intake` class. To avoid these pitfalls, it's possible to define intake-related methods as static members of a separate `IntakeCommands` class:

Author: What do you see duplicated?

> Regardless, I see static factories more for multi-subsystem commands than for single-subsystem ones.

I personally agree, but I can see some teams being more comfortable with "all commands are static factories" because (one possible reason) that's just fewer bits of information they have to drill into the heads of a bunch of novices. (Maybe I should add that to the "pros" list for static single-subsystem factories.)

> The factory methods presented above do have some negatives. They clutter up the `Intake` class (and the namespace of `Intake` methods) with command-related methods. With that pattern, it's also possible to break the intended encapsulation of the subsystem (as the warning box alludes to), since code in these factory methods can access `private` members of the `Intake` class. To avoid these pitfalls, it's possible to define intake-related methods as static members of a separate `IntakeCommands` class:

Reviewer: > What do you see duplicated?

There's a static command factory section and a static command group factory section.

> (Maybe I should add that to the "pros" list for static single-subsystem factories.)

I'd be very careful with wording that pro, if at all. I'm not sure knowing to only do one thing is good.

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    public class IntakeCommands {
        public static Command run(Intake intake, double percent) {
            return new StartEndCommand(() -> intake.set(percent), () -> intake.set(0), intake);
        }
    }

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

However, these benefits come at the cost of somewhat more cumbersome usage code. This is what the intake-then-outtake sequence looks like using static factory methods.
Notice how ``intake.commandRun(1)`` has been replaced with ``IntakeCommands.run(intake, 1)``, but the code is otherwise identical:

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    Command intakeRunSequence = IntakeCommands.run(intake, 1).withTimeout(2)
        .andThen(new WaitCommand(2))
        .andThen(IntakeCommands.run(intake, 1).withTimeout(5));

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

> The trade-offs between static and instance factory methods for single subsystems make the choice between them entirely a matter of personal opinion, and shouldn't be the subject of too much concern. It's only recommended to pick one way and stick with it throughout the entire robot project. Having a prescribed system makes code easy and fluid to navigate and reduces confusion between multiple contributing team members.

Author: Maybe this paragraph needs more clarification. The point I want to make is that for most of the choices presented, there are distinct tradeoffs that you need to carefully weigh in accordance with your situation, and while there's no one right answer there are some wrong ones. (e.g. doing [this](https://github.com/wpilibsuite/frc-docs/pull/1828/files#diff-2dabb56aecfa45c4147245f695e93b673ac6b6d1b640942812d230ba86c9172cR53) is just wrong and bad, period, and using factory methods might be a bad idea if most of your programming team doesn't even fluently understand object-oriented programming yet.) By contrast, the choice between static factory and instance factory for single-subsystem commands is almost entirely a matter of vibes (see @Oblarg on [Discord](https://discord.com/channels/176186766946992128/368993897495527424/975657701923246091))—it's basically whether you subjectively care more about making the `Intake` class look nice or making your call sites look nice.

> The trade-offs between static and instance factory methods for single subsystems make the choice between them entirely a matter of personal opinion, and shouldn't be the subject of too much concern. It's only recommended to pick one way and stick with it throughout the entire robot project. Having a prescribed system makes code easy and fluid to navigate and reduces confusion between multiple contributing team members.

Reviewer: All four are mostly semantic differences. I'm not sure what would be gained by highlighting such a contrast, and why wouldn't mentioning the "wrong answers" as cons accomplish that?
To give an example of what I mean, how about something like the following in the section for instance factory methods:
> While very convenient for commands that require only a single subsystem, this approach introduces multiple code smells and does not work well for commands requiring multiple subsystems.

Is there something here lacking for pointing away from the "wrong answer" of an instance factory method for multi-subsystem commands?

--- 
<details>
<summary>off-topic</summary>

> (e.g. doing [this](https://github.com/wpilibsuite/frc-docs/pull/1828/files#diff-2dabb56aecfa45c4147245f695e93b673ac6b6d1b640942812d230ba86c9172cR53) is just wrong and bad, period, and using factory methods might be a bad idea if most of your programming team doesn't even fluently understand object-oriented programming yet.)

I'm going to disagree with you again about that.
But this is going off-topic, if you want we can talk about it on Discord.
</details>

> The trade-offs between static and instance factory methods for single subsystems make the choice between them entirely a matter of personal opinion, and shouldn't be the subject of too much concern. It's only recommended to pick one way and stick with it throughout the entire robot project. Having a prescribed system makes code easy and fluid to navigate and reduces confusion between multiple contributing team members.

Author: I didn't consider the case of commands (not command groups) that require two subsystems at once. I'll add a note about that. I also am rephrasing this paragraph somewhat, so see how well you like the revision that should go up in a few minutes.

        }
    }

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

However, these benefits come at the cost of somewhat more cumbersome usage code. This is what the intake-then-outtake sequence looks like using static factory methods.
Notice how ``intake.commandRun(1)`` has been replaced with ``IntakeCommands.run(intake, 1)``, but the code is otherwise identical:

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    Command intakeRunSequence = IntakeCommands.run(intake, 1).withTimeout(2)
        .andThen(new WaitCommand(2))
        .andThen(IntakeCommands.run(intake, 1).withTimeout(5));

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

The trade-offs between static and instance factory methods for single subsystems make the choice between them entirely a matter of personal opinion, and shouldn't be the subject of too much concern. Some programming teams might prefer static methods to maintain consistency with multi-subsystem command groups, in order to define commands consistently across the entire codebase. However, other teams might want to take advantage of the more fluid syntax offered by instance methods. For the command group discussion below, this article uses instance method calls.

> .. note:: Much like command groups, commands that require multiple subsystems should not be defined in instance methods of subsystems, since they are not conceptually related to a single subsystem. These commands should be either defined inline at their usage location, constructed using a static factory method, or made a subclass of ``CommandBase`` (depending on complexity of the command and programmer preference).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: Commands that require multiple subsystems should not be defined in instance methods of subsystems, since they are not conceptually related to a single subsystem. These commands should be either defined inline at their usage location (if used in only one location) or constructed using one of the other options detailed in this article, depending on the complexity of the command and programmer preference).
```
No reason to split commands vs groups.

This should be moved to the section about instance factory methods.

    // TODO

This is sufficient for commands that are only used once. However, for a command like this that might get used in many different autonomous routines and button bindings, inline commands everywhere means a lot of repetitive code:

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    // RobotContainer.java
    intakeButton.whileHeld(new StartEndCommand(() -> intake.set(1), () -> intake.set(0), intake));

    Command intakeAndShoot = new StartEndCommand(() -> intake.set(1), () -> intake.set(0), intake)
        .alongWith(new RunShooter(shooter));

    Command autonomousCommand = new ParallelCommandGroup(
        new StartEndCommand(() -> intake.set(1.0), () -> intake.set(0.0), intake).withTimeout(5.0),
        new WaitCommand(3.0),
        new StartEndCommand(() -> intake.set(1.0), () -> intake.set(0), intake).withTimeout(5.0)
    )

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

Creating one ``StartEndCommand`` instance and putting it in a variable won't work here, since once an instance of a command is added to a command group it is effectively "owned" by that command group and cannot be used in any other context.

Instance Command Factory Methods
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> One way to solve this quandry is using the "factory method" design pattern: a function that returns a new object every invocation, according to some specification. Using command composition and :ref:`decorators<docs/software/commandbased/convenience-features:Command Decorator Methods>`, a factory method can construct a complex command object with merely a few lines of code.

Reviewer 2: “quandary”, not “quandry”

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    intakeButton.whileHeld(intake.runIntakeCommand());

    Command intakeAndShoot = intake.runIntakeCommand().alongWith(new RunShooter());

    Command autonomousCommand = new SequentialCommandGroup(
        intake.runIntakeCommand().withTimeout(5.0),
        new WaitCommand(3.0),
        intake.runIntakeCommand().withTimeout(5.0)
    );

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

Adding a parameter to the ``runIntakeCommand`` method to provide the exact percentage to run the intake is easy and allows for even more flexibility.

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    public Command runIntakeCommand(double percent) {
        return new StartEndCommand(() -> this.set(percent), () -> this.set(0.0), this);
    }

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

For instance, this code creates a command group that runs the intake forwards for two seconds, waits for two seconds, and then runs the intake backwards for five seconds.

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    Command intakeRunSequence = intake.runIntakeCommand(1.0).withTimeout(2.0)
        .andThen(new WaitCommand(2.0))
        .andThen(intake.runIntakeCommand(-1.0).withTimeout(5.0));

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

> This approach is recommended for commands that are conceptually related to only a single subsystem, and is very consise. However, it doesn't fare well with commands related to more than one subsystem: passing in other subsystem objects is unintuitive and can cause race conditions and circular dependencies, and thus should be avoided. Therefore, this approach is best suited for single-subsystem commands, and should be used only for those cases.

Reviewer 2: “Concise”, not “consise”

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    Command intakeRunSequence = IntakeCommands.runIntakeCommand(1.0, intake).withTimeout(2.0)
        .andThen(new WaitCommand(2.0))
        .andThen(IntakeCommands.runIntakeCommand(1.0, intake).withTimeout(5.0));

  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

While static factories are manageable for single-subsystem commands, they excel at multi-subsystem commands -- particularly command groups. With single-subsystem commands defined as instance factory methods, static factories can look like this:

.. tabs::

  .. code-tab:: java

    public class AutoRoutines {

        public static Command driveAndIntake(Drivetrain drivetrain, Intake intake) {
            return parallel(
                drivetrain.commandDrive(0.5,0.5),
                intake.runIntakeCommand(1.0)
            ).withTimeout(5.0);
        }

        public static Command intakeThenOuttake(Intake intake) {
            return sequence(
                intake.runIntakeCommand(1.0).withTimeout(2.0),
                new WaitCommand(3.0),
                intake.runIntakeCommand(-1).withTimeout(2.0)
            );
        }

    }
  .. code-tab:: c++

    // TODO

> Also, note the use of static factories to construct sequential and parallel command groups: this is equivalent to the ``andThen`` and ``alongWith`` decorators, but can be more expressive in some cases. Their use is a matter of personal preference

Reviewer 2: Missing period.
